TOLC-I EXAM STRUCTURE AND SYLLABUS

The sections are: Mathematics, Logic, Sciences, Reading Comprehension.

     SECTIONS   NUMBER OF    TIME ALLOTTED
                QUESTIONS
 MATHEMATICS   20 QUESTIONS      50 MINUTES
        LOGIC  10 QUESTIONS      20 MINUTES
               10 QUESTIONS      20 MINUTES
     SCIENCES
      READING  10 QUESTIONS      20 MINUTES
COMPREHENSION
       TOTAL   50 QUESTIONS     110 MINUTES

Syllabus for TOLC-I

Logic and Reading Comprehension ­ The logic and reading comprehension questions seek to test in
particular the candidate's aptitude rather than the skills acquired in secondary school. Therefore, they
do not require a specific preparation.

Mathematics, Arithmetic and Algebra ­ Properties and operations on numbers (integers, rationals, real
numbers). Absolute value. Powers and square roots. Logarithms and exponentials. Symbolic
mathematics. Polynomials (operations, factorisations). First and second degree algebraic equations
and inequalities or reducible. Systems of first degree equations. Fractional rational equations and
inequalities and with radicals. Geometry, segments and angles; measurements and properties. Lines
and planes. Significant loci. Properties of the main plane geometric figures (triangles, circles, regular
polygons, etc.) and their perimeters and areas. Properties of the main solid geometric figures (spheres,
cones, cylinders, prisms, parallelepipeds, pyramids, etc.) and their volumes and areas.

Analytic geometry and numeric functions ­ Cartesian coordinates. The concept of function. Equations
of lines and of simple loci (circles, ellipses, parabolas, etc.). Graphs and properties of elementary
functions (powers, logarithms, exponentials, etc.). Calculations with logarithms. Equations and
inequalities with logarithms or exponentials.

Trigonometry ­ Graphs and properties of sine, cosine and tangent. The main trigonometric formulas
(addition, subtraction, duplication, bisection). Trigonometric equations and inequalities. Relations
between the elements of a triangle.

Statistics ­ Basic elementary notions of statistics is required (permutation, combination, mean,
variance and frequency). Basic notions to read frequency diagrams and histograms.
Mechanics ­ The understanding and knowledge of the following topics and concepts is required:
scalar and vector quantity, measurement of physical volumes and measurement unit system;
definitions of the fundamental physical volumes (displacement, velocity, acceleration, mass,
momentum, force, weight, work and power); Newton's first law, Newton's law of universal
gravitation and Newton's third law, fluid mechanics.

Optics ­ Principles of geometric optics; reflection, refraction; refractive index; prisms; mirrors and
concave and convex lenses; elementary knowledge of lens systems and instruments.

Thermodynamics ­ The understanding and knowledge of the following concepts is required:
temperature, heat, specific heat, expansion, ideal gas law. Also required elementary knowledge of the
laws of thermodynamics.

Electromagnetism ­ Elementary knowledge of electrostatics (Coulomb's law, electrostatic field and
condensers) and magnetostatics (electric intensity, Ohm's law, magnetostatic field) is required. Also
required, elementary knowledge of electromagnetic radiations and their propagation.

Chemistry and material structure ­ Qualitative knowledge of atomic and molecular structure is
required. In particular the elementary understanding of atom constituents and the periodic table. Also
required is the knowledge of the difference between ionic and molecular compounds and their
physical characteristics, in particular of the more common compounds existing in nature, such as
water and the atmospheric constituents.

Chemistry symbols ­ Knowledge of chemistry symbols is required as well as the meaning of chemical
formula and equations.

Stoichiometry ­ Knowledge of the concept of mole and its applications is requested, as well as the
capability to carry out simple stoichiometric calculations.

Organic chemistry ­ Knowledge of the structure of the more simple carbon compounds is required.

Solutions ­ Knowledge of the definition of acid base systems and pH is requested.

Oxidation-reduction ­ Knowledge of the concepts of oxidation and reduction as well as elementary
knowledge of the combustion reaction is requested.

TOLC-I assessment
The result of each TOLC-I , with the exception of the English Language section, is determined by the
number of correct, incorrect and unanswered answers which determine an absolute score, deriving
from 1 point for each correct answer, 0 points for each unanswered answer and a penalty of 0.25
points for each incorrect answer.

For the English Language section there is no penalty for wrong answers and the score is determined
by the assignment of 1 point for correct answers and 0 points for wrong and unanswered answers.

Starting from the absolute score reported by each student for each individual section, the universities
adhering to the TOLC-I can translate the test result through their own evaluation system, choosing
which sections to use and indicating their own passing threshold.

To find out the various thresholds set by the universities participating in the TOLC-I, it is necessary to
consult the admission notices or the regulations issued by the universities relating to each degree
course.
